---
publish: true
title: Aristoi
excerpt: 📚 Aristoi ✒️ Walter John Williams (1992) ✨ 5/5 🛸 Posthuman 🖌️ Jim Burns
stars: 5
tags:
  - Posthuman
  - Utopia
artist: Jim Burns
year: 1992
writer: Walter John Williams
cover: aristoi.jpg
header:
  og_image: /assets/aristoi.jpg
---
In the far future, a post-human elite, the Aristoi, rule over a stagnant and docile humanity, the Demos, tightly controlling proscribed technologies and restricting reproduction to balance out the population's longevity. Theirs is a decadent post-scarcity culture with Renaissance overtones reminiscent of Ada Palmer's Too Like the Lightning.

Gabriel, is an Aristoi dilettante, dedicating his life to music, architecture and performative socialising until a conspiracy is uncovered. He's required to venture, as in many utopian novels, to a more primitive barbarian culture that he falls in love with - idealising it for its vitality and creative potential.

The heart of the novel lies in the stark contrast between the stagnant utopia of the Aristoi, and the vibrant yet harsh lives of the barbarians. This calls Gabriel's attention to the powerlessness of the Demos under their ruling Aristoi gods, creating a moral ambiguity which forces the reader to question which society, despite the barbarian's suffering, is truly better.

I found this a deep and engaging read once I'd found momentum, but those first 100 pages were tough. This is another novel where the post-human society and technologies leave you floundering for reference points, and you have to power through until it clicks. There are many eastern influences, weaving in themes of control through language and posture, and a fair bit of philosophy and martial arts. There's also a pervasive sexuality within the Aristoi culture, marked by fluid, selfish relationships and a lack of boundaries, further underscoring the power imbalance between the godlike Aristoi and the fawning Demos.

I liked that the ending wasn't clean - Gabriel takes a more morally grounded responsibility, but still fails to recognise his own manipulative behaviour in genetically engineering kids to fulfil his operatic vision. The result is blurred lines between right and wrong that gave me lots to think on. If you liked Ada Palmer, or Zelazny's Lord of Light, or Banks' Player of Games, then you should give this one a go - it's well worth the effort.