---
publish: true
title: Anathem
excerpt: 📚 ✒️ ✨ 🛸 🖌️
stars: 4
tags:
  - Metaphysical
artist: Ghost
year: 2008
writer: Neal Stephenson
cover: anathem.jpg
header:
  og_image: /assets/anathem.jpg
---
In a traumatised world, intellectuals have been exiled and denied technology. Confined to isolated monastic communities, the Avout spend their lives studying science and philosophy, while over the millennia, civilisations rise and fall beyond their gates.

The first third of Anathem is set within the walls of Saunt Edhar's Concent, following the life of Erasmus. We're treated to a rich mix of architecture, ritual, and language that builds a detailed foundation for the story on a par with Gormenghast or New Crobuzon. Just as I'm ready to settle into 1000 pages of this beautifully sculpted world, an existential crisis arrives, and humanity turns to the Avout.

Erasmus leaves the Concent, piecing together the mystery in an epic travelogue that culminates in a first contact that he barely escapes with his life. In the final third, humanity goes on the offensive; we face the crisis and comprehend its true nature through the power of symposiums and debate! However, I felt the wrap-up was mildly unsatisfying and rushed after the long build, pulling it down from its five-star potential.

The scientific and philosophical underpinnings of the plot are a constant background beat to the narrative, often communicated through didactic dialogues between Erasmus and his teachers. Stephenson holds nothing back, integrating advanced mathematics, the many worlds hypothesis, the quantum nature of the brain, and Platonic realism. And because this isn't Earth, every principle has a new name, from Pythagoras's theorem (Adrakhonic Theorem) to many worlds (Polycosmic Interpretation), making the glossary and epistolary epigraphs hugely important.

This is an experience as much as a novel. The depth of world-building and philosophical discourse is unmatched, but in return, the reader is asked to contend with an entirely new vocabulary, history, and science. Many will not be up for the commitment required. I loved the vividly realised setting of this book, even though at times I was exhausted by the sheer weight of the narrative. Its intense details, deep philosophy, and sheer cleverness create a world that will stay with me.